By: Clyde Ramalaine Someone asked me what I make of the South African Institution of Race Relations and the Gauteng MEC of Education, Panyaza Lesufi in their ongoing campaigning and de-campaigning of each other. Notwithstanding the published aims of the SAIRR, established in 1929, as an organization geared towards conducting research on race relations we know today it is doing more than researching when it defines outcomes as an active political entity that in the recent months came to reshape the opposition party leadership. We know this from the calculated role it played in the toppling of the Mmusi Maimane DA leadership. It is perhaps better to appreciate the IRR for what it is in this season that being a political entity that serves a “ white’ race and its interest. Fresh of its role and victory in redesigning the DA leadership structure it is flexing its muscle and has set Gauteng MEC Panyaza Lesufi as its next target. On the other hand, it is better to appreciate MEC Panyaza Lesufi as a politician who has over time despite good moves in technology advancement for public schools distinguished himself as one who is perceived as stirring controversy with race as a base. When I cite this here it is to recognise that Lesufi in for example the Davidsonville school problem, dare to brand ‘Coloured’ citizens of Davidsonville as racist. Lesufi was also blamed for problems at schools in the Eldorado Park Community with school principal appointments. Perhaps on another level, Lesufi had erroneously become the face of Afrikaans – hate for his relentless even misplaced campaigning against mother-tongue instruction in Afrikaans in particular. More recently Lesufi had to apologise for his condemning of a rugby supporter whom he without due fact-check accused for sporting an old apartheid flag. I cite these here to show an emerging tendency on the part of the MEC to attract controversy as someone who necessarily stirs racial tension. Whether this is right or wrong is not the subject, the perception of a ‘black nationalist’ MEC who has little regard for Afrikaans in still fighting a 1976 era student crisis, unfortunately exists and is part of our discourse. On another score, Lesufi has rightful ambitions and has been crafting his path to that summit he had set for himself. It appears in the course of that passage he will lean on and use whatever means legally to achieve his summit and the race card is one of them. It also is not possible to appreciate the IRR and or Panyaza Lesufi, outside the reality of the sojourning race paradigm that defines the panoply of life in South Africa. Most social scientists distinguish between race and ethnicity. The distinction is underscored in the sense that race assumes a biological base. To this end, races are distinguished by perceived common physical characteristics, which are thought to be fixed, whereas ethnicities are defined by perceived common ancestry, history, and cultural practices, which are seen as more fluid and self-asserted rather than assigned by others. In my assessment, the behaviours of both IRR and MEC Lesufi must be red-carded because they both have a misinterpretation of what education transformation means. Both utilize race as their means to an end, whatever that end may portend. To this end, the agenda of the IRR is crystal-clear and so is Lesufi’s and, none are working for the true eradication of racism because none problematize the false 18th-century social construction of race from its historical premise as entrenched in institutionalized apartheid and as uncritically appropriated by a democratic era political leadership. Both the IRR and Lesufi defend their race beliefs just from opposite ends of the spectrum. The one to defend the right of old eugenics superiority the other in claim of a new dominance if not superiority albeit underscored by degrees of past pain. Unfortunately, both IRR and Lesufi essentially believe in binaries of “white” and “black” races in which they see “others” who do not fit this their individual and collective paradigms as mere products of miscegenation (meaning produced from the two recognized “white and black” races). The IRR and Lesufi both have a political agenda and serve that with themselves if not their nationalist interest as the epicentre. They both stand for nationalisms albeit less critically reflected on. The one “white” nationalism the other “black” nationalism. The IRR and Lesufi equally so will tell you they believe and work for non-racialism yet neither will be open to engaging the challenge of this “non-racial” notion. On the part of the IRR a notion that means the white race identity must be protected as ab endangered species. Lesufi again from an ANC stance which we all know in the ANC is a discursive subject for many unresolved issues, in particular, its national question frames of identity. Hence non-racialism in the ANC is at best a slogan that is yet to be properly engaged. They will forgive us to deduce that in the end, both thrive of the publicity they in these media-driven campaigns extend each other as they with the bedrock of race keep the uniformed occupied. As it unfolds we will hear claims of bullying and victimhood from both sides. Let them continue their charade it’s after all political and their right.