Dear JJ I am responding to your intoxicated rant against Dudu Myeni live on television. Whatever Africans have done to deserve the incestuous and uncouth manner you take to television, we significantly apologize! This youth month you are once again a reminder of the depth the colonial force had upon the black mind. I understand why you have to insult an older woman on live TV, it is because you are a talentless bigot. Besides the insults and public slander of other human beings, you have nothing to your name. You are a creature of convenience who strips to the tune of the political player of the day. 1. South Africa Airways has never been financially viable. Not in the days of Saki Macozoma and Cheryl Carolus, not in the days of Dudu Myeni and certainly not in the days of Jarana and Gordhan. Your unfounded quest to rubbish Myeni’s attempts for transformation in the airspace is manufactured by hate for the Zuma administration. Some may not know how you stripped yourself to be Faith Muthambi’s spokesperson and when she snubbed you, you came against the entire Zuma brigade. Somewhere in your banal mind, you thought you could be the DG of Communications but because you were unqualified for the post, Muthambi would not appoint you. 2. When your name came up shortly after Phumla Williams’ appearance at the Zondo commission, you used Power FM as an attempt to clear your name. That got you fired! Now you are using this new channel to adventure your regret for being overlooked at the department of communications. Thokozani Nkosi must best know that you will turn on him when you don’t get what you want, the Channel’s position of Editor in Chief. 3. In 2017 you approached Zizi Kodwa and requested him to involve you in President Ramaphosa’s CR17 campaign. When Zizi snubbed you turned on him labeling him Ramaphosa’s ‘bot spokesperson’. When Zizi called your boss Given Mkhari to expose you, you told Karima that “you wanted to leave Power FM because Mkhari was a dick”. You JJ, are not a journalist. You are a political maggot that eats of the losing faction of the ANC to gain prominence. Here are the facts:
a. Myeni was the chairperson of the board at a parastatal and was since replaced after completing two terms. Dudu Myeni’s term at SAA ended in 2017. If anyone has to answer on the business of SAA it should be the new board and not Myeni. Since February 2018, South Africa had new ministers of Finance and SOE’s, new oversight structures and a new CEO. How is it that you put the blame of SAA’s losses at Myeni’s doorstep? b.SAA has a minister and a deputy minister at State Owned Enterprises. A board of 8 people and an executive of 8 people. During your television rant, you didn’t think to tell South Africans that all these persons account on the performance of SAA?
Do you know the other board members? Have you studied the financial reports of SAA? Does the financial performance of SAA lie in the purview of the chairperson? Why then do you victimize Dudu Myeni? c. Myeni has not charged with any crime and if she had been, she should appear before a court of all and should not be judged by pseudo reporters in the court of public opinion. The fourth estate, moreover Newsroom Afrika should not anoint itself as a political courtroom. d. In your attack, you say ‘Dudu Myeni cannot even construct a CV’. Did someone like you look at the performance of SAA during the time of it’s CEO Coleman Andrews?
Why do you not tell your viewers that Andrews sold a fleet of jets at SAA only to rent them back from that company? Why don’t you tell your viewers that Andrews later worked for the same company he sold the fleet to? Since you say Dudu Myeni is just a teacher, why don’t you tell your viewers about how chartered accountant Markus Jooste wiped out 600 million of pension funds in the biggest economic scandal in South Africa and he’s still a free man? e. Perhaps your attack on her is because she is the chairperson of the Jacob Zuma Foundation but why don’t you use your 3 hour TV rant to tell the nation how Minister of State Owned Enterprises Pravin Gordhan has been doing business with SAA through his shares at corporate giant Bidvest. Why don’t you tell us how his nephew Ketso Gordhan has been the beneficiary of government tenders boasting over 60 million a year? f. The Standing Committee on Public Accounts (SCOPA) and two forensic investigations into SAA found no evidence to your allegations. According to your TV channel, Myeni collapsed SAA, but you detail no evidence and get away with it because no one is speaking out. Until now! This youth month you are once again a reminder of the depth the colonial force had upon the black mind. I understand why you have to insult an older woman on live TV. It is because you are a talentless bygot. Besides the insults and public slander of other human beings, you have nothing to your name. You are a creature of convenience who strips to the tune of the political player of the day. It is a sad day for Africa that the media continues to be used by Africans as a weapon to destroy other Africans
Your political twerking has rewarded you with a television gig, but this new channel should best rid itself of you before it follows many like itself and faces an untimely death. Nkosentsha Shezi.
ANC member in good standing. Ward 41
0718347106