By: Clyde Ramalaine Separating the chaff from the wheat is an axiom generally used to distinguish between things. News 24 on August 15, 2019, carried an article in content essentially attributed to ANC bigwig, Jessie Duarte. In such, she enters the discourse in attempts of rebutting a demand to ‘come clean’ on his CR17 campaign funding. Duarte, as cited in the article, said, “There is no requirement in law that leaders should declare donations made to internal campaigns. It is not correct to impose some kind of standard after the fact, and to do so with respect to only one campaign, writes Jessie Duarte. Perhaps it’s firstly important to accept that the ANC is a polarised environment with Luthuli House its Headquarters leading in the polarization. It is also a congested space of interest however defined. There is little doubt that the current NOB for whatever reason attest a faction and at times factions of factions depending what the issue is. We will remember how Deputy President Mabuza accused the office of the SGO and in particular the DSG as the one who took his name to the Integrity Commission. We also know that the current chairperson Gwede Mantashe in his previous position as SG were not always on par with the DSG we know this from an era when some of the ANC NOB’s were booed at a May 1, COSATU rally when others were given a free pass.  This incident sparked division at the time. The current context of the ANC regardless of how it may advance the elusive unity attests an entrenched factional description and one where people feel it their entitled rights to differ in public from one another. Secondly, let us extend due credit to the DSG Jessie Duarte in acknowledging that she has always supported ANC Presidents regardless of their complex challenges. This is not new we know she supported Mandela, Mbeki, Zuma and it is unfair to see her current support of Ramaphosa as unique with necessarily an aim of redeeming her reputation or in need of trying to buy face. Anyone who follows ANC politics knows that Duarte has always rallied behind ANC presidents in acknowledgement of their elected status as the legitimate face of the organisation she has been associated with over an elongated period of time. Reading her current support of ANC president Ramaphosa in a vacuum is disingenuous and necessarily will lead to an ad-hominem argument when her track record on this score details nothing but consistency.  Her support of Ramaphosa in this era and in particular on the issue of the unfolding court-cases with the Public Protector is also not unique, but stands in the tradition of an ANC that recently released a statement attributed to its Official Spokesperson Pule Mabe. There may be a debate on who was part of that statement in its compilation, and it was speculated that the SGO office, with Ace Magashule, did not necessarily pen it given the known polluted environment. We may equally ask in view of the ANCs official statement on supporting its president as articulated by Mabe, why any office-bearer beyond that seeks to direct the traffic of discourse along personal views when there is an official position in existence. We may ask what then in  the political context shifted so drastically since the last statement that warrants an office bearer to pen a note? Thirdly, an important point to make here and now is to admit we are not clear if this article presents the personal or official views of the DSG on the subject that has come to define in prominence a discourse over the last month. The article closes in reference to her official elected designation of her office, which is a common knowledge subject. We also know that ANC Officials and leadership no different to all are entitled to have opinions on a broad range of subject matter that defines issues of national interest. Having, therefore, an opinion even a public one regardless of how troublesome it presents in discourse is not a sin in the ANC but welcomed. To this extent, a usual disclaimer of ‘personal capacity’ is used as generic. Not that this necessarily helps the subject matter as less convoluted given the contradictory tides of ANC politics. However, reaching the end of the op-ed does not leave us any wiser if the ANC-DSG, Jessie Duarte in this instance purely shares her personal opinion or if she consciously writes with grey reference to an official office position. Fourthly, let us also not claim we know if Duarte was directing her views to an external audience of the ANC understood in opposition parties or whether it’s a broad swipe to include formations of internal audiences who also are  calling for the president to take the ANC and SA into his confidence on the subject matter. She will forgive us to deduce that she is addressing this article to both external and internal audiences. The fifth issue, which really emanates from the third aspect, is the very plausible and even potentially cynical claim that an impression may be created that there are multiple SG offices functional in the ANC at present. If the views are official than that is borne out by a clarification on the part of the ANC usually from the office of the Secretary-General, Ace Magashule. Therefore, the absence of a disclaimer of ‘personal capacity’ and official capacity perhaps vibrates in the background warrant clarifying. In the sixth instance to reduce this as an unfair campaign defined by negative narrative with the aim of tarnishing Ramaphosa, when other candidates have not been demanded to come clean, is also not in respect of the facts we all know, regardless of whether we want to know it or not. May we remind Duarte and all others who purport a selective amnesia on this score. The facts confirm a history wherein a SA president (Cyril Matamela Ramaphosa) in parliament was asked a question by the leader of the Opposition Mmusi Maimane as to a donation of R500k to have been received for his CR17 campaign. Keep in mind at the time of the campaigning the president was the deputy president of the ANC and SA. The president had rightful and ample space not to answer the question by using his parliamentary privilege and right to defer in presenting a thoroughly researched and validated answer.  He would have underscored how serious he takes parliament as a place of accountability. Shall we remind Duarte and others, the President chose not to exact that privilege instead he strayed into spaces of morality about if his son was guilty, he would personally take him to a police station. He then presented diverse versions on the subject of the source and for what purposes this was received. The president has also on several instances determine to share his lack of knowledge on any campaign funding donors and him knowing them. This by itself presents the president answerable to come clean since it is now common knowledge that the president was intimately apprised with names, contribution size and requests to honour gatherings. He is answerable not in conflated easily draped campaign funding escapism but since on this matter second submission albeit written still confirms his categorical denial of any knowledge on who contributed to his campaign funding, of which the meagre R500k in a coagulum of +R1bn amount adopts the centre stage. We, therefore, cannot make campaign fundraising in a generic sense the central issue when the R500k from Bosasa a questionable entity and its leader Gavin Watson is explicitly the true central aspect. This matter brought information in a claim of a case to the PP and she subsequently made findings against him. How that pans out ultimately in court rulings for or against him on diverse aspects do not automatically exonerate him in being answerable framed in a call to come clean. Shifting the goalposts to other candidates when no one has raised and equally brought forth information to the PP on the subject matter is simply a deflection. Let us remind ourselves in the honesty of conviction that this moment like all others in other epochs demand engage the subject of a president in a moral contradiction there is until now one person and one person only who had findings on such subject made against him. Until those who easily advance and throw around names of ANC candidates produce information, not even evidence, in a formal sense, for the PP to investigate, we are compelled to see their antics as pure deflection. Ramaphosa himself in his last public the statement hinted at this claim in the verbiage of “quite a bit of money was raised by all candidates of the ANC.” This may or may not be true in its own space, it, however, is not the subject at hand nor a justification for his current predicament which starts and ends with his choice to answer a question who could have deferred. To this extent, he has himself and not the opposition parties, the PP or any of those who never endorsed his campaign or presidency. Claiming victimhood here is what McWhorter warned is in his theory of victimology. The obligation is thrust on him in twofold firstly he came on the ticket of a moral cleaning up campaign and his office defines in constitutionality imbibes and impresses a choice for a morality that is underscored by transparency. Even if his personal choice for a morality defined in claims of a campaign against state capture was not part of the debate, he still remains obligated for the inherent identity the office of president holds in a constitutional democracy. This hour like all before requires leadership not cheap escapism in legal or even court victories when he chooses to stand naked in the morality of an organisation that is in excess of a century old. In the seventh  instance, when Duarte no different to many come to the defence of Ramaphosa,  in the current unfolding debate on a president answerable on information that emanates from a set of  investigations opts to frame it as   ‘coming clean as demanded of the president, as  misplaced debate’, we are compelled to pause and engage what she says and perhaps not say. The debate on political party funding transparency is an old one, yet it hitherto adopts a truculent legislative expression inconclusiveness. Meaning while the debate is raised regularly from various angles and interests until now, there is no finality and the subject matter since it remains open-ended in regard to definitive laws and legislation that attest enactment. To, therefore, assert there is no law prohibiting the political campaign fundraising is a fair assessment perhaps only in regard to its current grey legal standing. However, beyond the absence of a legal enactment in the directive of the subject in frames of party fundraising remains a cardinal aspect of a moral subject that neither the ANC or anyone who hopes to lead society can easily dismiss.  The fundamental challenge for the ANC which perhaps people like Duarte are in this sense oblivious to is what does it mean to say a single candidate’s campaign to become ANC president needed north of R1bn. Easily claiming other ANC candidates that participated in 2017 or even before also raised funds is perhaps misplaced and a haphazard deflection from the real issue. Irrespective of whether previous candidates needed and subsequently raised money; we have as a matter of truth never before known what those figures implied. The ANC itself cannot show any record of what its candidates raised, therefore data on this remains speculative. What we do know today is that Ramaphosa’s CR17 campaign back in 2017 and beyond cost +R1bn. This truth stands in its own shadow and cannot be conflated in a generic campaign of fundraising deflection. What then constitutes the corn in this call of a president to come clean? The more fundamental question ANC members and leaders such as Duarte and all must in the sincerity of love for the ANC engage is this since we now know what it cost to win an ANC presidency contest (notwithstanding in final 179 votes) has become the new standard. Meaning,  come 2023 and beyond the base is R1bn. This by extension implies only billionaire campaigns can win ANC elections. This is the undeniable reality that no spin-doctoring can obfuscate. I will postulate this funding-debate is far beyond an easily picket-fences claim of the absence of current legal frames of an outlaw, but essentially must be cognisant to understand, engage and confront in soberness of mind the very real threat of moral degradation and of the 107-Year-old organisation.  The ANC’s anti-corruption stance and its articulated disdain for vote-buying speak to its moral character real or aspired and that obligates a sober engagement of the subject at hand in this epoch. To seek to frame the campaign fundraising different to the demon of corruption, when claims are levelled of state capture in prepaid, is to confirm a selective handle on morality. Lastly Duarte, therefore, cannot claim the demand of a Ramaphosa coming clean as misplaced, straight-jacketed  in claims of  there is no base to argue any contravention of any law that does not in the first place exist, when she equally seek to champion  a  morality of the ANC while turning a blind eye to the cancer of  capital’s direct influence on electing ANC presidents as  a now a  precedent henceforth understood in billionaire status. Meaning Duarte like all others may merely be kicking the can further down the road in not confronting the question – of what this means for this presidency and all future elections. At some point in soberness, the ANC owes it to itself to engage capital and how it erodes the fibre of its moral character when in its sophism continue to advance itself a democratic organisation where the presidents are elected with branches as its base. Or it must admit the ANC is for sale, its branches in vote-buying to determine an outcome. This moment is defining for the ANC and to fool around with personality politics is to not discern this moment.