By: Sunday Independent A businessman whose company scored a R2 billion pharmaceutical tender in 2015 is among the donors who gave a total of R1bn to President Cyril Ramaphosa’s ANC leadership campaign in 2017. Stavros Nicolaou, of pharmaceutical company Aspen, donated millions of rand to the CR17 campaign trust account through an organisation called the Hellenic, Italian and Portuguese Alliance (HIP Alliance) in 2017. Leaked emails and other CR17 campaign records show Nicolaou also mobilised 23 other prominent businessmen to do the same at a cocktail party organised by Ramaphosa’s adviser Donné Nicol in December 2017. The money was transferred into the Standard Bank account of Ria Tenda Trust, whose trustees include businessman and former MTN chief executive Sifiso Dabengwa, former National Union of Mineworkers (NUM) chairperson James Motlatsi, Cyril Ramaphosa Foundation CEO Donné Nicol and public policy researcher Dr Crispian Garth Olver, according to trust deed documents seen by Independent Media. Aspen is one of the major beneficiaries of government contracts. It was among four companies which were jointly awarded a R10 billion tender under former Health Minister Aaron Motsoaledi to provide the Health Department with antiretroviral medication for three years from 2015 to 2017. The company scored a R2bn deal while Sonke Pharmaceuticals was awarded R3bn, Cipla Medpro R2bn and Mylan Pharmaceuticals R2.8bn. Nicolaou on Saturday confirmed that he “donated money to the ANC” and also attended a cocktail party organised by Ramaphosa. He conceded in a released statement that he had exchanged an email with Nicol in November 2017 but claimed it was “redacted so as to alter its original form”. The company scored a R2bn deal while Sonke Pharmaceuticals was awarded R3bn, Cipla Medpro R2bn and Mylan Pharmaceuticals R2.8bn. Nicolaou on Saturday confirmed that he “donated money to the ANC” and also attended a cocktail party organised by Ramaphosa. He conceded in a released statement that he had exchanged an email with Nicol in November 2017 but claimed it was “redacted so as to alter its original form”.