PORT ELIZABETH, September 6 – Eastern Cape police have arrested six suspects following an armed robbery at a clothing store in Humansdorp. Police spokeswoman Colonel Priscilla Naidu said it was alleged that six unknown men entered a clothing store in Main Street in Humansdorp and threatened the staff at gunpoint on Thursday. Naidu said they were robbed of cash, clothing and cell phones. The suspects then fled in two vehicles, a Kia Picanto and a Renault. Naidu said the robbery was immediately communicated through police channels and vehicles were alerted to be on the lookout for the getaway vehicles. All exit routes from Thornhill to Port Elizabeth were blocked off and by mid-afternoon, the Kia Picanto was spotted on the N2 near Greenbushes. “SAPS Kabega Park gave chase and forced the vehicle to take the Seaview off-ramp where they succeeded in stopping the vehicle.” Clothing and several sim cards were thrown out of the moving vehicle, Naidu said. Three suspects aged between 22 and 24 were arrested while several cellphones and clothing items were found in the boot of the car. Meanwhile, the Renault had taken the Uitenhage off-ramp and was picked up by PE Flying Squad on the Rocklands Road. A chase ensued towards Uitenhage. “When the suspects noticed police hot on their heels, one of them fired at the pursuing members. Police returned fire and as the vehicle turned into Kwanobuhle, PE Flying Squad managed to cut them off.” “During the chase, clothing and other items were thrown out the vehicle.  Clothing and the cash registers were found in the boot of the car. “ The suspects, aged between 26 and 31, were arrested. Naidu said the vehicles were hired vehicles and all the suspects hailed from the Motherwell, Kwanobuhle and Swartkops area. The men were detained on charges of possession of the suspected stolen property. “Detectives are busy establishing their involvement in the business robbery in Humansdaorp. Additional charges will be added in the course of the investigation.” – African News Agency (ANA)