By Luzuko Bashman As a member of the African National Congress (ANC), I have noted with disgust the unwarranted attack by Mr. Adriaan Basson on comrade Nomvula Mokonyane for having attended the memorial service of comrade Gavin Watson, and delivering a eulogy in recognition of the contribution that comrade Watson made to the liberation struggle in our country. Mr. Basson presents himself as a journalist and political commentator, but this is only a facade, and in reality he is a political protagonist with a clear agenda to promote the interests of his white monopoly capitalist masters – who pays his salary and provides him with the media platforms that they own, and from where he relentlessly continues to attack and undermine the African National Congress. For the White Monopoly Capitalists (WMC), for whom Basson works as a propagandist,
unity in the ANC is anathema. They know very well that a united and strong ANC, that
continues to be true to its political roots of being a pro-poor party, committed to the full liberation of black people in general – in particular Africans – and that pursues the ideals of the Freedom Charter, could never be subservient to their interests, nor accept their continuing stranglehold on the South African economy. A united and purposeful ANC that can carry out its historical task to be the leader of society in pursuit of the total liberation of all South Africans is a nightmare for the likes of Basson and his bosses. Therefore Basson will always promote a divisive agenda for the ANC, trying to present a deeply flawed and false dichotomy that there are a group of so-called ‘angels of morality’ within the ANC, who are draped in their angelic ‘white washed’ robes and halo’s by strange alien and white powers outside the ANC – who do not have the
best interests of the ANC at heart – and who are supposed to purge the other so-called corrupt ‘devils’ in the ANC. The legitimate fight against corruption gets abused in order to selectively destroy the
characters of certain comrades and accuse them on the basis of flimsy stories and trumped up Stratcom fake-news propaganda of being corrupt, while there are others who are clearly implicated in corrupt activities, but are selectively not pursued and given the proverbial ‘free ride’ by the mainstream White Monopoly Capitalist (WMC) media. While this so-called fight against corruption is all the time pushed as the reason why President Ramaphosa must purge certain comrades in the ANC, as Basson urged the President again to do in his attack on comrade Mokonyane, it is evidently not about corruption, but the underlying intention is to execute a reactionary ideological purge against those comrades in the ANC who have advanced the agenda of Radical Economic
Transformation (RET). Basson‘s ultimate intention is to divide us, and to cause so much disunity within the ANC that our Liberation Movement will no longer be able to carry out its historical mission in pursuit of the full liberation of our people. It is the old divide-and-rule strategy. The unsolicited advise that Basson gives to President Ramaphosa, to the effect that he
must ‘get rid of’, and imprison longstanding ANC comrades in good standing on the basis of hearsay, unsubstantiated allegations and Stratcom smear campaigns, is certainly not in the best interest of the President, nor of the ANC. I am sure the President knows that he will follow such advise at his own peril, and at the cost of dividing and ultimately destroying the ANC. The call to purge comrades without due legal process of law, when such comrades have not been found guilty of any crime, undermines the basic constitutional principle that every citizen has the right to a free and fair trial, and must be presumed innocent until found guilty in a court of law. The unsolicited advise that Basson gives to President Ramaphosa, to the effect that he
must ‘get rid of’, and imprison longstanding ANC comrades in good standing on the basis of hearsay, unsubstantiated allegations and Stratcom smear campaigns, is certainly not in the best interest of the President, nor of the ANC. I am sure the President knows that he will follow such advise at his own peril, and at the cost of dividing and ultimately destroying the ANC. The call to purge comrades without due legal process of law, when such comrades have not been found guilty of any crime, undermines the basic constitutional principle that every citizen has the right to a free and fair trial, and must be presumed innocent until found guilty in a court of law. The likes of Basson, despite their syrupy-sweet talk of so-called support for President Ramaphosa, does not have the President’s interests at heart. In fact to the contrary, it is their intention to use and abuse the President for their own nefarious objectives, and in the process also to undermine and destroy the African National Congress. Thus, Basson decided to castigate comrade Mokonyane for having spoken at the memorial service of comrade Gavin Watson. However, he conveniently forgets the significant contribution that comrade Gavin, together with the other Watson brothers, made to the liberation of South Africa. Basson being a typical white person – like so many of his fellow arrogant white South
Africans – have always considered progressive white comrades, such as the Watsons, to be traitors. He seems to want to argue that the African National Congress must deny the great contribution that comrade Gavin Watson made to the liberation struggle, on the basis of unproven allegations of corruption and hearsay evidence that was presented to the Commission of Enquiry into State Capture (popularly known as the Zondo Commission), by a former embittered and fired employee, with the name of Angelo Agrizzi, who have not yet had his evidence tested in any court of law. The likes of Basson, despite their syrupy-sweet talk of so-called support for President Ramaphosa, does not have the President’s interests at heart. In fact to the contrary, it is their intention to use and abuse the President for their own nefarious objectives, and in the process also to undermine and destroy the African National Congress. Thus, Basson decided to castigate comrade Mokonyane for having spoken at the memorial service of comrade Gavin Watson. However, he conveniently forgets the significant contribution that comrade Gavin, together with the other Watson brothers, made to the liberation of South Africa. Basson being a typical white person – like so many of his fellow arrogant white South
Africans – have always considered progressive white comrades, such as the Watsons, to be traitors. He seems to want to argue that the African National Congress must deny the great contribution that comrade Gavin Watson made to the liberation struggle, on the basis of unproven allegations of corruption and hearsay evidence that was presented to the Commission of Enquiry into State Capture (popularly known as the Zondo Commission), by a former embittered and fired employee, with the name of Angelo Agrizzi, who have not yet had his evidence tested in any court of law. Does this arrogant white man, Adriaan Basson, now want black South Africans to act alien to their own culture, and not show respect for the departed by staying away from comrade Watson’s funeral, and also not recalling his contribution to the liberation struggle? This is callousness of the worst kind! All of us in the African National Congress should acknowledge, and thank comrade
Nomvula, for the courage that she displayed by having attended, and spoken at, the memorial service of comrade Gavin Watson. In having done so she upheld the best of what the ANC should stand for. Her speech correctly acknowledged and praised the sterling contribution that comrade Gavin made – together with his brothers – as members of the African National Congress, when our Movement was still a banned organization, and
when there was little else to gain from joining the ANC but blood sweat and tears,
detention, torture and every so often even death. The Watson’s sacrificed the white privileges that they could have enjoyed under apartheid, and were scorned and hated for their principled stance against apartheid by their fellow white South Africans. We should never forget the principled position that comrade Gavin’s
brother, comrade Cheeky Watson, took by refusing his selection to the Springbok rugby team, in rejection of the racism that the Sprinbok emblem then represented, and in favour of continuing to promote non-racial sport. It seems that Basson just cannot get himself to burry the racist battle-ax of his – and the collective white – resentment against the Watsons, and comrade Gavin Watson in particular. Nowhere in the eulogy that comrade Nomvula delivered about comrade Gavin did she try to justify any potential wrongdoing that he may have committed during his long career as a businessman. She acknowledged that there are allegations, but refused to give those allegations credence at a time when no court of law have found them to have
substance, nor passed any judgement. The principled approach that she took in her speech should be lauded for its legal and constitutional correctness, as well as for the true comradeship that she showed by not cowering away from the known and proven historical facts, about the contribution of comrade Gavin to the liberation struggle. Any other approach would have been expedient and devoid of revolutionary consciousness. Mr. Basson can try, as he may, to attack comrade Mokonyane, but in doing so he only succeeds to expose his own moral depravity and ‘whiteness’. We know that he does not care one iota for President Ramaphosa – or for that matter for any black person, nor for the well being of the African National Congress – nor for the history of our liberation struggle, nor for the liberation heroes who brought about our liberation from the scourge of
apartheid, who among them most certainly also count comrade Gavin Watson and his
brothers. In African culture we celebratate ubuntu, and we understand and respect the humanity of our fellow brothers and sisters – both in life and in death as our revered ancestors. Thus, we understand the continuity of history, and we will not deny the heroic and note-worthy contributions of fellow comrades, because at a particular later moment/juncture it suits the expedient self-serving agendas of certain persons, and interest groups, to destroy them. Unlike Mr. Adriaan Basson, and the white Vlakplaas-like apartheid culture that he comes from, we do not dismember and burn our fellow comrades on the braavleis fires of moral decrepitude, while toasting and drinking in the service of White Monopolly Capitalists and their continuing white economic power and exploitation of black South Africans. Ag nee wat Adriaan, dis nou genoeg! Sies man. Jy behoort jou te skaam! *Luzuko Bashman is the ANCYL Chairperson – Dullar Omar Region