Solly Makganoto The Tshwane African National Congress [ANC] caucus in the City of Tshwane has on Tuesday said that it is dismayed, disappointed and horrified that the ‘corrupt DA-led administration’  has released a memorandum to staff and appointed a ‘fake, unqualified and incompetent’ Chief of Emergency Previn Govender to be the Acting City Manager while the embattled Dr Moeketsi Mosola is on leave. This is after Mosola was also accused of falsifying information after the SA Qualifications Authority’s revelation that he lied about the verification of the qualifications of senior managers with the body. The ANC caucus said it has raised the issue of Govender with both the embattled City Manager Mosola and Executive Mayor Solly Msimanga for five (5) months. “Mr. Previn Govender has misrepresented his Emergency and Fire qualifications and the Institution in the United Kingdom has indicated to the South African Qualifications Authority [SAQA] that Previn’s qualifications as outlined in his CV are fake. “In his CV, the ANC has exposed that Mr. Previn Govender lied and said he has an Advanced (i.e. Associate) Diploma in Fire Technology obtained from the Southern African Emergency Services Institute; which is an NQF Level 7. We now know, that SAQA disputed this and revealed that this was an in-house qualification which has no NQF Level assigned to it”, said the ANC in a statement. In a statement, SAQA CEO Mr. Joe Samuels said: “The SA Qualifications Authority notes with concern recent statements made by the City of Tshwane indicating that they had verified the qualifications of their senior managers with SAQA before making their appointments.” “SAQA wants to put it on record that it does not have any verification records for Mr. Previn Govender on its database. This means that no verification of qualifications for Mr. Govender was ever processed by SAQA. “The ANC caucus can reveal that Mr. Previn Govender was hired as part of the multi-party arrangement of the DA and ACDP via Community Safety MMC, Mr. Derrick Anniruth Kissoonduth, who is suspected and alleged to be a relative of Mr. Previn Govender (sic). The party said that the appointment of unqualified staff in the City of Tshwane is well documented in particular the Office of the Executive Mayor Solly Msimanga, Which includes Ms Marietta Aucam, a former Councillor and Chief of Staff forced to resign after it was found the she lied about being in possession of a degree qualification – she was earning more than a million rands. “It was then the “Body Builder” Mr de Villiers who is still earning R1 million salary with a fitness training certificate as his highest qualification. He works as the Mayor’s diary PA to this day. “As we write this statement, a report sent to the Public Protector by the City Manager a few months ago, found that the Spokesperson of the Executive Mayor Mr. Sam Mgobozi was appointed irregularly, he did not meet the basic requirements for the position as advertised and also earn more than a million rands”. The ANC caucus has called on Msimanga to immediately remove Govender (as Acting City Manager) and other irregularly appointed officials from office and instruct that they be suspended with immediate effect pending disciplinary hearings. “The corrupt DA-led administration in the City of Tshwane is painfully limping from one scandal to the next, it is the ANC’s caucus position that ethical leadership and honest stewardship should be instantly restored in the Capital City’s administration. “We again call on the Minister of CoGTA, the Premier of Gauteng and the MEC of CoGTA to immediately place the City of Tshwane under administration using section 139 [1] b”. 