By:Clyde Ramalaine December 2019 is becoming a proverbial bleak Christmas since monthly salaries due to ANC staff, while promised, is yet to be paid. On the one level, this is bad news and a red flag on financial management in the ANC as an organisation. It places the role of the Treasury General in square focus since the responsibility of a stable financial environment in which workers receive their salaries on time is one of the key performance areas of the job. On another level, it reflects badly on the Ramaphosa ANC presidential leadership when as the year closes 600 workers are first promised to expect their salaries on December 13, incidentally the day the offices close for annual holiday. When the date came and gone workers learned the date shifted to the December 20, when this date also expired they were informed to expect salary payments sometime this coming week. To make matters worse, the ANC spokesperson Pule Mabe’s insensitive and nonchalant attitude and comment do not help when he attempts to water down the issue of non-payment. Mabe’s statement unwittingly unveils another issue, the case of the elites versus the masses, because some ANC staff members from their personal wealth status are simply not affected if salaries are paid or not. In another sense, Mabe’s unfortunate comments prove rather ahistorical since it is not cognisant of the role the ANC played in the fight for the rights of workers. When 600 workers two days before Christmas are not sure if they will be paid it is a crisis and warrants being treated with due circumspect, sensitivity, honesty and empathy? Yet, while the aforementioned constitute critical issues in question of presidential and treasury leadership respectively, this may not be accidental at all. Let us understand the meaning of an unhappy workforce of an ANC organisation. An unhappy workforce confirms a weak ANC, meaning its morale and presence to implement a coherent plan and set of programmes for the year becomes questionable. Is there a rationale for a weak ANC, what does a weak ANC mean, and who stands to benefit when morale is low and job security is no more a certainty? It is here that I will venture to assert, a weakened ANC at an internal level serves the interest of a weak president who finds implementing ANC policies and resolutions cumbersome. One would be fooled to consider the ANC as an organisation in a micro sense without appreciating a macro level reality. With macro, I mean appreciating the interconnectedness and inescapability of state and party relations. When one asks for the appreciation of a macro level, it is asking for the necessary links between what is happening with state-owned enterprises across the board and to ascertain if there are any congruent linkages to what is happening in the ANC as we speak when December salaries are yet not paid. What are the odds that there are definitive and crucial links? Without belabouring respected USA economist Noam Chomsky’s theory on privatization, in which he directs the capitalist mind behind privatization as one that is ruthless heavily inebriated with avarice, where the entity in question is made to look useless, then is broken up in assets and sold to friends for the cheapest price. A crucial aspect of privatization is its resultant effect, which usually translates to retrenchments and job losses. We know that SAA is currently in business rescue which becomes the easiest way of ensuring job losses with the least labour and legal intervention. I want to venture to say as predicted before, Eskom will go the same route. We know at Eskom numbers of as high as 20 000 jobs were mentioned as anticipated job losses.
While the ANC is not for sale or is it? Since it’s current president needed R1bn to make it to the top, a case can be made that the ANC no different to the slew of SOE’s are for sale to the highest bidder? It may not be too far-fetched to surmise this non-payment of December salaries is an orchestrated proverbial testing of the waters of a functional ANC, in claims of bloated ANC staff, which places a strain on its resources. So while a logical case could be made for a bloated staff complement, as so often is done of the SOE’s, a deeper look may just unravel an orchestrated political tactical action to break the current ANC staff complement up, and therefore weakening it. What does a weak ANC spell? It translates to an ANC that is soft on its resolutions and policies as adopted at its key conferences. It would also be a weakening of the SGO/CEO function which in essence determine employment needs. Why then would it be important to weaken the ANC? Until now it is comfortably accepted that the current president is not in control and may have lost the internal battle for power. This means while the president is portrayed as embraced by an external none ANC voting crowd of constituencies he has not succeeded to translate that external support into the inner working head-quarters of Luthuli House space. How do we know that? We know this since journalists like Max Du Preez and Peter Bruce have done the parts to advise the president that he must get the Secretary-General charged and arrested to ensure Ramaphosa secures political control in the ANC. We know it because since December 2017 there have been many shifts in loyalties in the ANC. Interesting developments have seen former supporters of Ramaphosa questioning him in this season, given the challenges of load-shedding and the perceived claim that whites are benefitting as trusted by this presidency. It does not help when Ramaphosa is on record to have said: “We will continue to appoint skilled and competent whites and others…” Given the reality of a president that has lost at an internal level the battle of being trusted to lead, it becomes tactical to test the hegemony of the staff by creating uncertainty in particular in the season when people are on national break. Given the reality that increasingly questions are being asked of the commitment of the president, and his cabinet, to implement ANC resolutions, we know that the upcoming NGC will be very active in the reflection of this aspect. We also know that the Secretary-General Ace Magashule is tasked to guard over the implementation of ANC resolutions and policies from a party point of view. He has hitherto attempted to jealously guard that role and in a game of high stakes knows when to remind deployed ones in the government of their mandate. My short time on earth has taught me there is nothing cynical in politics. Nothing is obvious and what often looks highly unlikely may just be very real. Retrenching ANC staff would send a clear message of uncertainty creating anxiety and confusion perfect conditions to attain predetermined outcomes and to wrestle control in benefit to a struggling president. Should the ANC arrive at a point of retrenchments, it becomes important to ask how that process would be dealt with. There rightly may be anxiety as to how retrenchments will be implemented since it easily could be used as a means to deal with some who are calling for the implementation of adopted policies and resolutions. I, therefore, would ask is this not a tactical move that reflects or borrow from a macro reality in which the intention is to shift the balance of forces in control to the president who has since December 2017 failed to lead in implementing ANC policies as adopted at Nasrec? 