Staff Reporter JOHANNESBURG- The MKMVA has on Thursday, congratulated Geoff Makhubo on his election as the ANC mayor of Johannesburg. This comes after Makhubo won the vote on Wednesday by a comfortable margin. “In my capacity as President of MKMVA I extend my warm congratulations to comrade Goeff Makhubo, who is also the Chairperson of the Johannesburg Region of the ANC, for his solid victory”, said Kebby Maphatsoe. “I have worked with comrade Makhubo within the ANC structures, and specifically the region of Johannesburg, both in my capacity as an ANC member resident in the
Johannesburg Region, as well as President of MKMVA, and I know him as a competent
and very committed leader. I have always been impressed by his understanding of the challenges faced by ex-MK veterans, and his commitment to implement the provisions of the Military Veterans Act, 2011 (Act No. 18 of 2011), with regards to improving the plight of military veterans, and granting our members the respect and dignity they deserve.” The movement furthed said that: “We are looking forward to the city of Johannesburg now being under the stewardship of a committed ANC liberation fighter, someone who understands the history of our liberation struggle, and the huge sacrifices that our members of MKMVA, and their families, made for
the liberation of our country. ” We reject with the contempt that it deserves the spurious attacks have been
launched on the person and integrity of comrade Makhubo, by some opposition parties, most notably the DA and the EFF. This is only sour grapes by sore losers,” said the movement. According to the MKMVA, the fact of the
matter is that the allegations that they are trying to level against the new ANC mayor have been investigated, and he has been cleared of any wrong doing. The MKMVA further called on all the ANC councilors, together with their coalition partners, to now run a people’s centered and service delivery orientated administration that will always prioritize
the legitimate needs and demands of our people. “There are many challenges ahead, specifically the neglect and disdain that black poor communities suffered under the elitist and arrogant DA, and the squalor and dirt that engulfed many the inner city of Johannesburg, and many other areas where the majority of black (specifically African) citizens live. These areas, and their cleaning up, and the improvement of services to our people should be our apex priority. MKMVA is confident that the new ANC-led administration will not be found wanting, and we pledge our full
support”. MKMVA also wants to express our revolutionary gratitude to the Secretary General (SG) of the ANC, comrade Ace Magashule, who at a national level, together with the provincial and regional structures of the ANC, worked tirelessly to ensure this great victory for the ANC. The role that the SG of the ANC played as a true grassroots people’s leader, and astute
negotiator, deserves special acknowledgement for the manner in which he worked for unity in the ANC collective to secure the return to power of the ANC in Johannesburg,” said the MKMVA. The MKMVA added that victory of the ANC in Johannesburg must be seen as a victory for the citizens of Johannesburg. “This victory will only have significance if it contributes significantly to improvements in the lives and living conditions of the residents of Johannesburg.” According to the MKMVA, it must now be all hands on deck in order to achieve that laudable goal, and to ensure that
control of this great city of Johannesburg will never ever again fall in the hands of
charlatans and elitists, as they have experienced during the infamous period of the DA-coalition rule. “As Madiba used to admonish us: It is now in our hands! MKMVA pledges its full support to comrade Mayor Makhubo and his ANC-led team. In conclusion, the MKMVA said “Forward to a people’s oriented – and specifically pro-poor – city administration, that will
deliver quality services to our people!”