Steve Motale JOHANNESBURG- A company whose services include among others helping other companies to be black economic empowerment (BEE) compliant, has itself been accused of not being BEE compliant and, as a result, its BEE credentials are now the subject of an investigation by authorities. Randburg-based LFP Training Consultants, whose motto is “Agents of transformation”, claims on its website to be “a Level 1 B-BBEE: Generic Company status and 30% Black Women Owned status”. The company boasts big clients such as ABSA, Telkom, Bosasa and Bidvest among others, has also been accused of fronting. Africa News 24-7 has for the past few months been investigating allegations of fraud, corruption and fronting against the LFP, which has embarked on a huge marketing and advertising campaign to sell itself as a catalyst for transformation. Taking into consideration the high volume of allegations that have been investigated, it will be impossible to put together all these in one story. Africa news 24-7 will thus run a series of stories starting with this one, which focuses only on allegations of fronting against LFP. The rest will follow in the coming weeks. Well-placed sources who preferred to remain anonymous for fear of victimisation, told Africa News 24-7 that Nthabiseng Phoshoko, who is the company’s only black director and is listed as a LFP’s co-director with the company’s chief executive officer Louis Pulzone, is allegedly being used as the black face of the company for the sole purpose of sourcing big business for which she is not adequately rewarded. Sources allege that Phoshoko, who is LFP’s Commercial Director, does not have any decision-making powers within the company, and that Pulzone is the sole decision maker. Sources also claim that Phoshoko, who earns a salary far less than virtually all her white subordinates, is just being used as a black face for BEE compliance purposes and to attract big business. Broad-Based Black Economic Empowerment Commission, which falls under the Department of Trade and Industry confirmed it was investigating LFP. Commission’s spokesperson Madidimalo Ramare did not divulge full details of what exactly the commission was investigating. “We do not discuss matters in the media. So, we can only confirm that a matter relating to LFP is under consideration by the B-BBEE Commission,” Ramare said. Africa News 24-7 has seen a copy of an email dated 13 September 2019 sent to all staffers by Pulzone in which he informed them that he would be out of the country from September 14 till 25 September. In the email, Pulzone notified staffers that in his absence, Doleres Schwartz, “is formally appointed as acting CEO during this time”. A source asked: “If Nthabiseng has full powers of a director at LFP, why would Louis Pulzone not appoint her as acting CEO during his absence instead of giving such a key role to Doleres Schwartz, who is not even a permanent employee but a contract worker at LFP?” Sources further claim that Pulzone lives a high life and that he owns among others a fleet of super cars (vehicles he allegedly buys and sells regularly), a farm and a river-front mansion in the Vaal, while his co-director, Phoshoko only drives a Kia Rio. It is alleged that Phoshoko does not even have powers to sign any document of behalf of LFP and that Pulzone is the one who signs every document. “When David Letsoara, caretaker at Pulzone’s farm died in October this year, Nthabiseng wanted to use company funds to buy flowers for the family. She couldn’t do this because she didn’t have Pulzone’s permission”, said the source. “Nthabiseng cannot even secure flight tickets without Pulzone’s permission. The young lady is just being used by Pulzone to enrich himself and his family and one wonders why she would make herself a laughing stock because everyone in the company knows she is only a director on paper who’s just being exploited for her blackness,” said the source. Another well-placed source told Africa News 24-7 that investigative journalism TV series Carte Blanche was at some stage investigating allegations of fronting against LFP but Pulzone boasted to him, saying the story would never be aired after he (Pulzone) “sorted out” Carte Blanche.The source said Pulzone gloated to him he had bribed Carte Blanche with hundreds of thousands of rands for it not to broadcast its investigation into LFP. “He goes around gloating about how untouchable he is and how he has everyone, including law-enforcement agencies, top government officials and powerful politicians in his pockets,” sad the source. Africa News 24-7 sent questions to Carte Blanche which responded via its lawyer Dario Milo of Webber Wentzel Attorneys. “Carte Blanche has never investigated the LFP Group. We most certainly have not been bribed by the LFP Group not to publish any allegations against them,” Milo said. He however confirmed that LFP had donated an amount to the tune of R600 000 to The Carte Blanche “Making a Difference” Trust, which he claimed was a separate legal entity to Carte Blanche. “The Trust was registered (IT3593/2008) as a Public Benefit Organisation. As such, the Carte Blanche Making a Difference Trust is an entirely independent legal entity, separate to that of the Carte Blanche programme. The Trust is managed by its patron and trustees and not the Executive Producer and Managing Editorial team of the Carte Blanche show,” Milo said. He added that Karolina Andropoulos, the patron of the Trust, had confirmed that LFP was one of many donors to the Trust.  He said LFP had publicly pledged R600, 000 to the Trust to be paid in R50, 000 instalments starting in July 2019. Milo said so far, the Trust had only received 4 payments of R50 00 each from LFP totalling R200 00. “The Carte Blanche editorial team would never neglect to pursue a legitimate investigation just because the subject of the investigation happens to be a donor to the Trust. That is not how independent journalists work, nor how editorial freedom works,” Milo said. Phoshoko denied being used for fronting. “This allegation is false and untrue. I am a director of the company and I am involved in all the decisions made in respect of the company. This allegation is unfounded and makes a mockery of my hard work and dedication to achieve my position and my station in life.” In his response Pulzone also denied that Phoshoko was being used as a front. “Ms Phoshoko has worked very hard throughout her employment with the company.” Pulzone added that Phoshoko “has access to all information, at any given time, in the company, including all financial information”. He further claimed that Phoshoko “makes decisions in the company alone”, or with his (Pulzone’s) assistance “if necessary”. Asked if Phoshoko is a shareholder and what percentage she holds, Pulzone said Phoshoko “is not a shareholder in her personal capacity”. Pulzone said: “The ownership structure that presently exists, in respect of the shareholding in the company, is through a Trust. The Trust structure for ownership is recognised and approved by the BEE Commissioner. The company, along with many other companies in South Africa, utilises the Trust, as part of their ownership structure, in accordance with the Codes of Good Practice.” Pulzone further claimed Phoshoko is a trustee and a beneficiary of the trust, “and she has received benefits as a beneficiary in the trust”. Pulzone confirmed that LFP had pledged R600 000 to The Carte Blanche Making a Difference Trust and that to date, R250 000 had been paid to the trust. “This donation will continue for a further seven months.” Pulzone rejected allegations that the donation was a bribe to Carte Blanche in exchange for the TV series not to broadcast its investigation into LFP. He insisted that he was not aware of any investigation by Carte Blanche into LFP.