JOHANNESBURG, February 15 – Kaizer Chiefs coach Ernst Middendorp said that despite Magic FC playing in the ABC Motsepe League, they ‘were not going to take it easy ‘ when the two teams meet in Sunday’s Nedbank Cup match at Nelson Mandela Bay in Port Elizabeth (start at 3pm). “As I said before our last Nedbank Cup game against Tornado FC, there’s nothing new about going to Magic FC,” said Middendorp on Thursday. “They play in the Motsepe League, but we are not going to take it easy. Far from it. It’s our obligation to qualify for the next round of the Nedbank Cup quarterfinals. We are serious about winning, we want to win every match we play.” The goalkeeping department has been in the spotlight recently at the Amakhosi camp. “Daniel Akpeyi is cup-tied and we are forced to make changes and possibly bring in Bruce Bvuma.” The Nigerian international recently arrived at the club, but he had already played in a Nedbank Cup fixture for his former team, Chippa United – thus making him ineligible to represent Amakhosi in this competition. “The other absentees are due to injuries that we have reported already,” remarked Middendorp, referring to the injuries of Itumeleng Khune, Mulomowandau Mathoho and Lebogang Manyama. “We have to be patient as the technical team. If Akpeyi is not available, we have to make changes.” “We like to build our play from the back,” said Middendorp. “We have had a chance to practise our tactics during the training sessions we’ve held recently and I’m happy with the preparations.” “We observed Magic FC last weekend,” added the coach. “We are going to play our best starting team in Port Elizabeth. We had our scouts watch their game so we have information about their structure and way of playing. “We will be well-prepared to win the match and aren’t going there relaxed. Above all, it’s about our own ideas and strategy.” The coach also spoke about Ryan Moon. “It’s difficult for Moon because he had a great time last season and getting a call-up for Bafana Bafana. I promoted him while we were together at Maritzburg United. “His situation is similar to that of Dumsani Zuma. They both have potential but lack of enough training sessions has contributed to him falling behind in the selection order. “He is a talented and qualified young player who’s working hard to get his chance. He will definitely be in the squad this weekend,” concluded Middendorp. (ANA)