By: Clyde Ramalaine At what stage do we move on? Is there a time, we the living here and now can free ourselves from the romanticism of the illusion of freedom celebrated in twenty-five years with an anchor in Mandela. Perhaps July 18, 2019, confirms we have moved on from Mandela, less in disrespect of his contribution but in conscious rejection of the ductile iconic identity, he himself rejected. An iconic identity created by colonial and apartheid beneficiaries essentially for their own material good. Let there be no doubt, or any misconception Mandela in a pantheon of known and unknown liberation fighters made his unique contribution. He served and represented his generation and time adequately. Yet he is not above question and critiquing him is no cursing of our parents. He, unfortunately, cannot become the means to keep us hostage, eternally muzzled to engage the shortcomings, failures, and compromises of and ANC under his leadership in a negotiated settlement deal agreed by the elites on both sides of the proverbial railway line. A settlement of which, Neville Alexander postulated as mere “regime change”, signifying the form of rule and the institutions of the state machine “without any alteration of economic power or of the management of the repressive apparatus of the state.” Yes, the trickery of a negotiated settlement that has us manacled. A settlement our children of the fees-must-fall campaign unequivocally analyzed as “the 1994 project”. This time of the year in what has come to be moments of reflection manifesting in a slew of lectures on Mandela, his legacy imagined and real, airbrushed often misconstrued, affords some to in political personal self-interest agenda pontificate how we all are dutybound to emulate the icon. Mandela is invoked as a drug to tranquilize rightful revolutionary cries, to sedate questioning and conscious minds. Mandela is weaponized to rebuke those who rightfully call for radical economic transformation. Mandela is unleashed in stoic reprimand others. He is wielding stick for those conveniently identified contrary voices to theirs as conspirators in a ‘fightback strategy’. Mandela the myth and the re-imagined is consciously abused to stifle the radicalism of the hour and to quell the rightful call for delayed economic transformation. It is Mandela who is thrown at us when we call for land redress while Malcolm X told us long ago the struggle was always about land. Mandela is paraded as the closest thing to a deity. The ingenuity of the false superior race threatens to remake him so that 500 years from now that society may speak of him as a ‘white’ man who liberated ‘blacks’. Mandela is abused to justify racial so-called national sports teams. He is misused when Ramaphosa can dare to tell us how good ‘white monopoly capital’s’ leaders are to South Africa. To this end, I have asked, We free Mandela by rejecting a make-belief celebration of 67 minutes led by campaigns that were designed by the same oppressors, who have always known how to decide what is good for the oppressed. We free him from the lectures of hypocrites. We consciously do not celebrate Mandela Day because our challenges demand that we remain sober in our cause, militant in our pursuit for radical economic change not as offered but demanded, in full return of land as a first non-negotiable principle, in wider quest to control our own destiny. We refuse to be hoodwinked, and labeled as part of the new creation lexicon of ‘fightback’ strategy, hellbent on being corrupt, and thus fighting the efforts of the media- ordained angels. If you hear us protest if you see us gather, and read what we write it to demand what this hour stands for. When we on Mandela day bemoan our plight on land it is our rejection of the Mandela, we are force-fed in one-sided narrative a Mandela we did not know. Let Mandela rest he is assigned a grave and an eternal rest like all others that equally made their contributions. He played his part as is demanded of us in this epoch, stop being blindsided by the icon. Mandela was not given to live in this epoch because the challenges of this era are ours and we must fight, rally and mobilize regardless of how much it may cost at a personal level. We dare not be intimidated by the whimsical labels we must soldier on. Our long walk is made much longer by the buffer zone who look like us but are the protectors of apartheid beneficiary interest to which they have pledged an eternal loyalty. Fortunately, this era needs no  Mandela real or recrafted, but you and me.