By Paul Ngobeni Democracy loving South Africans and all self-respecting black people should be incandescent with rage when the Public Protector becomes a victim of unwarranted attacks by those hell-bent on seeking her removal from office. We should all be disgusted that those stirring up an anti-Mkhwebane hysteria are bigoted propagandists trying to divert attention from their own proven track record of unprofessional and disgraceful conduct. It is even more offensive that the arrogant white racists who have organized themselves into a well-orchestrated choir baying for Mkhwebane’s blood are led by the disgraced Advocate Paul Hoffman of the fly-by-night outfit known as “Accountability Now.” Collectively they have falsely suggested that Advocate Mkhwebane’s future involves one of four fates-resignation, impeachment, striking off the roll of advocates or facing criminal liability for perjury. That will never happen! Actually, I am filled with a sense of déjà vu when I hear the nauseating falsehoods being peddled about another black woman professional. In a previous case involving Advocate Jiba, I concluded after careful analysis that the High Court judgment striking her off the roll would not stand as it was woefully deficient and “was not made in accordance with the law and constitutionally sound principles.” I also observed that “lawyer discipline cases must never be based on the politically motivated clamor for revenge and partisan battles for the capture of state institutions.”  I admonished that our “judiciary is not supposed to acquiesce in racially motivated and selective prosecution of black legal practitioners by the white-dominated General Council of the Bar under circumstances where white lawyers guilty of comparable or more egregious offenses receive lenient treatment and no punishment.” See, Case against Jiba – A travesty of justice and evidence of state capture, writes Dr. Paul Ngobeni; https://www.africantimesnews.co.za/2016/09/28/case-against-jiba-a-travesty-of-justice-and-evidence-of-state-capture-writes-dr-paul-ngobeni/ . Needless to state that Jiba was vindicated as the Supreme Court of Appeal and the Constitutional Court overturned the erroneous judgment striking her off the roll.  We are forced to deal with similar white mischief once again. Hoffman’s outfit “Accountability Now” is inherently unfit to pursue ethical issues in lawyer discipline cases or the public domain. Its disgraced founder Advocate Hoffman was similarly subjected to scathing judicial criticism when he filed frivolous judicial misconduct complaints against Chief Justice Mogoeng. Two complaints were filed against Hoffman by myself and the Higher Education Transformation Network (HETN) respectively. This was after two senior judges described Hoffman’s complaints against the Chief Justice as disingenuous and far-fetched. The senior judges observed latent traits of Hoffman’s racist undermining of black judges when they concluded that Hoffman discloses that ” he had been critical of the readiness of the respondent for the office of Chief Justice and that he had addressed correspondence to the respondent demanding clarification on matters relating to his fitness for that office. lt is indeed shocking to hear that an advocate could write letters to a sitting judge demanding that the judge explains his fitness for office.” After investigation of my complaint against Hoffman, the General Council of the Bar (GCB) informed me in writing that it would file a court application for Hoffman’s name to be struck from the roll. Inexplicably, the GCB later claimed that it intends to halt the process altogether because Hoffman privately spoke to the Chief Justice and the latter “forgave” him.  This is another clear case of white advocates being protected at all costs by the GCB and FUL conveniently looked the other way. Hoffman’s hypocritical “holier than thou” attitude on the Public Protector should be rejected with the contempt it deserves. I now deal with the legal principles that make it unlikely that Advocate Mkhwebane will ever be disbarred solely on the basis of the split Constitutional Court judgment. Scathing judicial criticism of a litigant who happens to be a lawyer does not automatically amount to finding professional misconduct leading to disbarment. The court in GCB v Jiba and Others observed that: [82] Very often when adverse remarks are made in legal proceedings, the person against whom the remarks are made is not given the opportunity to state his or her case to the impending adverse remarks. It is for this reason that courts do not easily make adverse remarks. … Courts are of course willing to reconsider adverse remarks afresh given the responses by the person against whom they were made. In the light of the split judgment in which the Chief Justice and another judge sided with Mkhwebane while the majority criticized her harshly, it would not be difficult for her to offer an explanation exonerating her.  Moreover, as pointed out by the Chief Justice, the majority opinion was based on demonstrably erroneous facts and as such would not carry decisive weight in a contested disciplinary hearing. In addition, there is a plethora of evidence that the Concourt majority completely misapplied the law and misread the facts. Contrary to the falsehood hawked by white racists, a judge’s harsh criticism of an advocate does not ineluctably suggest that disbarment should follow. In fact, the normal approach by the Concourt where an advocate/attorney is alleged to be guilty of misconduct and criticized in court proceedings was exemplified by De Lacy and Another v South African Post Office(CCT 24/10) [2011] judgment. There the court dealt with allegations that “the applicants’ attorney and counsel were more than hired assassins-they associated themselves with the undignified, wanton and baseless attacks their clients mounted against the integrity of the judges concerned. In that way, counsel’s argument made common cause with their clients’ crusade to upset the decision of the Supreme Court of Appeal which in turn deprived their clients of the attractive award of R60 million.” Regarding the question whether these legal representatives had breached the ethical duty they owe to a court as its officers Deputy Chief Justice Moseneke adopted an exemplary approach as follows: [120] An officer of the court may not without more convey to court allegations or claims by a client when there is a reason to believe that the allegations are untruthful or without a factual basis. This duty is heightened in circumstances where imputations of dishonesty and bias are directed at a judicial officer who ordinarily enjoys a presumption of impartiality. It behooves the legal representative concerned to examine carefully the complaints of judicial bias and dishonesty and the facts, if any, upon which the accusations rest. Here it is doubtful whether these legal representatives did so. That, in my view, is a matter which calls for an inquiry by their respective professional bodies to which the applicants’ attorneys and advocates belong. An appropriate order drawing the attention of these professional bodies to this judgment will be made. [122] The conduct of the applicants’ legal representatives may have to be dealt with by their respective professional bodies. They should be requested to consider whether their conduct amounts to a breach of any ethical rule. To this extent, the Registrar will be directed to furnish a copy of this judgment to the Society of Advocates, Johannesburg, and to the Law Society of the Northern Provinces. Contrary to the uninformed views of the bigots, the Constitutional Court has not made a similar referral to the disciplinary body in Mkhwebane’s case. The usual practice of the Concourt when faced with an errant advocate’s misconduct is that it may deal with the matter itself and censure or reprimand the said advocate or it may order that a copy of its judgment be sent to the professional bodies to consider whether the advocate’s  conduct  amounts  to  a  breach  of  any  ethical rule. In this way, the Court eschewed any prejudgment or pronouncements over the guilt or innocence of the legal representatives. It simply requested the Law Society and the Society of Advocates to “consider whether their conduct amounts to a breach of any ethical rule.” In this way, any subsequent jurisdiction of the professional bodies would be based on the express order of the Concourt and the court expressly refused to sanction these legal professionals. The utter hypocrisy of outfits such as GCB, Accountability Now and FUL must be exposed – they appear reluctant to pursue white advocates guilty of misconduct and have always been content that the court’s harsh reprimand was sufficient sanction and deterrence. For white advocates, they accept the established principle that a court’s admonition or adverse comments against an advocate is sufficient as it is tantamount to sanctions and a stain on the reputation of the lawyer involved. Accordingly, the GCB never pursues these errant lawyers in parallel proceedings where they seek harsher sanctions of striking them off the roll. But the GCB adopts a different stance when it comes to black advocates. Published law reports are replete with instances where white advocates were harshly criticized by judges for their lack of candour and dishonesty and condemned for their conduct of court proceedings.  And yet not one of these condemned white advocates have been disbarred. Outfits such as disgraced Hoffman’s “Accountability Now” transgress a fundamental constitutional due process rule and undermine the rule of law when they prematurely call for Mkhwebane to resign, to be impeached and to be disbarred. They foster racism, undermine judicial independence and bring the judiciary and the legal profession into disrepute.