By: Clyde Ramalaine -Is it possible that a combination of political interest informed the decision? – As I pen this opinion piece the South African National Defence Force, is deployed to quell the historical and easily defined gang-violence of the Cape Flats, its presence we are told is in response to a call of the community leaders after a very recent intense period of shooting that saw fourteen lives lost. Yes, you heard right those trained in the military war, desensitized to engage in community life are called upon to do what police and criminal justice combination of systems in democracy has dismally failed in. The defence force in aid of the police are roaming the streets of apartheid – townships essentially to restore life to normal as is claimed. Cape Flats children every morning for the last week woke up to the presence of colossal armoured vehicles, known by names such as ‘nyalas’. ‘casspirs’ and ‘ratels’ carrying heavily armed soldiers that all confirm the presence of war. Some will counter the Cape Flats with over 1300 people killed in the last year attests a war-zone. To this end, war must be met with war. You will forgive me for seeing the deployment of the SANDF is much more than Deja vu for some of us who lived through that era living on the Cape Flat. History repeats itself as the axiom goes. It vividly reminds of a scene from the 1980s. How can we ever forget, when apartheid unleashed its SADF war-dogs on a people’s struggle for liberation, a time when Simba chips trucks were filled with soldiers. I am involuntarily back to the burning of teargas in our nostrils and the ringing of live ammunition discharged on people gathered on common roads we daily accessed. Roads like Eisleben, Spine Road, Morgenster, Moddderdam, KIipfontein roads to name a few. We were here before when the army was brought in and left more than psychological damage. I will argue that there is perhaps a causal link between the violence of the Cape Flats and the 80’s deployment. We heard that the soldiers are here only to aid the police and therefore, are not in charge. They have been put through a short-term course on community life to ensure nothing unfortunate happens. The presence of the SANDF already solicits mixed emotions, from those who have to wake up to its presence. We have been here before, not making small the pain of periods of intense violence and deaths that at one point produced pseudo-community-structures like PAGAD (People Against Drugs) and other responses. These in their seasons also claimed successes but never with any evidence to substantiate or means of sustainability. President Ramaphosa in his parliamentary address on Thursday, was at pains to remind us that the SANDF is not the SADF of apartheid. His logic is the SANDF since it has participated in peace-keeping initiatives essentially in upper-Africa are necessarily friendly to communities. I can appreciate the president’s attempt at calming minds, yet I do not think the president assumes having the military in civil society is a standard normal thing. Even in instances where the SANDF was not the SADF, soldiers are trained for warfare to discharge live ammunition at targets in a war zone. Democratic era communities can never be equated to the war zones that demands the military. When I problematize the decision to deploy the army in this musing it is essentially on four levels. Firstly, the very real impact in damage on the most vulnerable people of the Cape Flats better understood in trauma. Secondly, to suggest the presence of the SANDF can never be a solution. Thirdly, what happens once the temporal military period comes to an end? Finally, it is to postulate the unseen politics behind this decision and what interests these may serve. When we see the playing boy and the heavily armed soldier it is intended to communicate a scripted message of a reclaiming of the streets and community-life. The presence of the military is sold as the restoration to the normalcy of what defines community and social life. The truth is we are yet engaging what normalcy means in the Cape Flats where the abnormal since forced removals and evictions continue to haunt people. Since the deployment as is readily admitted is only a temporal means, it is clear the nagging socio-economic challenges that undergird the prevalence of the type of life of the Cape Flats is simply not addressed. Is the future psychological damage to the boys and girls playing in the street waived for immediate short-term interests? On another score, the challenge of a potentially compromised police system and staff actively part of the activities of the fourth economy is not addressed either. Also not remotely addressed is the complex combination of the gang and drug problems taken on head-on sustainably. In that sense, the presence of the army is a band-aid response to a possible bone marrow cancer situation. The very real and necessary engaging of the challenge on what happens beyond the military intervention, cannot be waived at this juncture. The final aspect entails the politics of the deployment is the more toxic one. It is possible that  the presence of the SANDF beyond an easy claim of “the community called for it’, confirms on another level toxic combination of DA  racialized, “white” interest politics, a populist Minister Bheki Cele, commonly obsessed to be a “General”, and a President who thrives on public relations and a sense of feel-good in democracy produced the now SANDF militarized Cape Flats communities.  We all know this is not sustainable. The politics that vibrates in the background see the DA’s ‘white’ interest agenda gets its ‘problem communities’, quarantined. The DA never had the appetite or interest to fix the very real socio-economic ills that define the Cape Flats. It has always seen these communities as the proverbial cancer-tumour if excised or quarantined from their “healthy” white Cape Town the necessary solution. Unfortunately, as with so many things in SA, the ANC led government is again led by the DA to make this decision. It can’t claim it there’s because the DA wanted this age ago. Cele with this categorically confirms the police inept, deplorably inadequate and functionally incapable to act out its constitutional mandate to police communities. Why not shut the dysfunctional police and replace them with the solution – the SANDF? Needless to say president Ramaphosa with his head in a flat spin on what  he is confronted, suspended between organisational loss of power if he ever had it and an ever-dwindling praise-singing crowd that has  gone hoarse, increasingly sharing their frustrations with his inability to either act or live up to being the economic solution he was sold to be. He instead with this deployment opts for his usual drug, Public relations and spin mileage that he with this move of deploying the military will fix what apartheid birthed and democracy perfected in the maintenance of Cape Flats. If the Cape Flats today attests a deployed army it is less to serve the interest of the poor but these manifested mellifluous agendas. Some will disagree and claim the president is caring and therefore has heard the cry of the people of the Western Cape, in particular, the Cape Flats with this deployment. I wish I could share the same sentiments. Anybody who remotely follows politics knows that the president is under tremendous pressure on so many fronts, from internal ANC organisational control, personal challenges R500k Bossasa donations as delineated in the PP report(s). Add to this a truculent and struggling economy that has seen no love from the rating agencies. Ramaphosa did not cover himself in glory on his own mixed messages of promises of million jobs followed by subsequent concessions of coming job losses renders Ramaphosa a questionable. In this sense deploying the SANDF is an image management stint aimed at giving the political elite a sense of heroism for doing something. some reprieve and feel-good moment. The novelty of being president is long gone. we know that since the ‘Thuma-mina’ and ‘Ramaphoria’ evaporated with the first heat of scrutiny. Granted, there is no overnight solution to any of SA’s manifold problems, yet we warrant asking what does the deployment of the military really means and what interest does it serve. What is undeniable social life in democracy on the Cape Flats is today institutionally militarized.