Sello Theletsane JOHANNESBURG- Umkhonto we Sizwe Military Veterans Association (MKMVA) spokesperson Carl Niehaus has issued a stern warning to journalists he accused of having written “derisively” about the organisation. Speaking earlier today to the crowd gathered in front of the Pietermaritzburg High Court in support of former President Jacob Zuma, Niehaus called out the journalists who have in the past months written negatively about ex-MK combatants, calling them ‘toy soldiers’, and describing the MK combat uniform as “Pep Store overalls”. He mentioned the following journalists by name:
Ranjeni Munusamy
Quanitah Hunter
Karien du Plessis
Stephen Grootes
Pieter du Toit and
Adriaan Basson Niehaus proceed to lead the crowd in chanting: “Shame on you!”. He said these journalist employ Stratcom tactics, and are the lakeys and servants of White Monopoly Capital (WMC). Niehaus said neither Zuma, nor him, nor any other MK commanders were made by the media. “We are the products of the masses of our people who are the grassroots members of the ANC in our branches. We fear nothing, we will stand strong, we have the protection of our people!”, Niehaus said to loud cheers. Niehaus said that MKMVA members always came in their numbers to the court hearings to support Zuma, because “he is one of the most courageous and illustrious Commanders of MK, and, MKMVA has the greatest respect and admiration for his contribution to the liberation of our people”. Niehaus said he, and other MKMVA members, would never leave a fellow liberation soldier behind on the battle field. Niehaus warned the six journalists he identified as having written “disrespectfully and derisively” about MKMVA members and the MK combat uniform, that “we in MKMVA will come for you”. He emphasised that MKMVA members, and MKMVA as an organisation, will come for the journalists “in a legal manner”. He further warned: “These so-called journalists must be under no illusion that we will come for them”. Niehaus concluded: “enough is enough. We will no longer tolerate their disrespect for our liberation struggle, and for freedom fighters who have sacrificed their lives in the struggle, and for the liberation of South Africa”.