Steve Motale JOHANNESBURG- ANC Treasurer General Paul Mashatile is the latest to come to speak out in complaint of his bugged phones. Speaking at the ANC’s Siyanqoba Rally on Sunday, Mashatile told several news agencies that he was aware that his phone was bugged. “In fact, many of our phones are bugged,” he said. Mashatile also told TV news channel eNCA that “there is not just one agent(spy) monitoring them but many agents”. Mashatile was putting a nod to comments previously made by ANC Secretary General Ace Magashule. Magashule told the media that his phone was bugged. Last month the ANC’s Spokesperson Dakota Lengoete sent out a statement informing the public that the Deputy Secretary General, Jessie Duarte’s social media accounts were hacked. This makes Mashatile the third member of the top 6 to level allegations of spy work active in the ANC. All fingers point to State Security Minister Dipuo Letsatsi-Duba who has waged a war against Magashule and Mashatile. Letsatsi-Duba is also in a bitter war with the public protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane. Letsatsi-Duba is being investigated for using her security company to gain tenders from the Limpopo government when she was a MEC. Letsatsi Duba’s security company is also connected to a company called Dubana Enterprises, a company with a dually owned by herself and Andile Ramaphosa, the son of President Cyril Ramaphosa. In another company called VitroSA, Letsatsi-Duba and Ramaphosa (Andile) provided the audio-visual technology in 5 municipalities in Limpopo. In the tender that clearly flouted tender procedure and regulation, Letsatsi-Duba and Ramaphosa benefited more than 8.1 million jointly. Last month Mkhwebane opened a police case against Letsatsi-Duba, this after Letsatsi-Duba provided “special case protection” for Minister of Public Enterprises Pravin Gordhan. This was done so Gordhan wouldn’t appear before the public protector for an investigation into the rogue unit created by Godhan whilst he was still the SARS commissioner. Mkhwebane said that Letsatsi-Duba was shielding Gordhan from facing the law as Gordhan needed no special case protection. Special case protection is a term used by the security and intelligence community to shield an “informer” from arrest. Mashatile is believed to be the latest victim of the rogue spy camps in the ANC because he has taken Magashule’s side on the matter of parliamentary lists. Magashule is believed to have refused to “clean” the list of Zuma supporters; therefore keeping NEC members Bathabile Dlamini, Malusi Gigaba and Nomvula Mokonyane on the list. In what looks like a fight to remove Magashule, a source in the police revealed that there was a plot to arrest Magashule in the next few weeks so he wouldn’t manage the list processes for the ANC’s 6th administration in parliament. Ramaphosa’s comments on news channel Newzroom Afrika that Magashule’s phones were not bugged have touched a raw nerve with some in the NEC. Tony Yangeni took to Twitter to ask: “How would Ramaphosa know that Ace’s phone isn’t bugged? Did Letsatsi-Duba bug Ace’s phone under his instruction? So we put out a hit on our own SG to protect Andile Ramaphosa and Pravin Gordhan….yah neh”. A day before the elections, the top 6 looks to be three on Ace’s side, Ramaphosa and Mantashe on one side and Mabuza a lone ranger.