Sello Theletsane JOHANNESBURG- Smart mobility technology company Yookoo Ride is assisting entrepreneurs reach millions of potential clients. Yookoo Ride which recently launched its smart mobility app, which links riders and drivers, has about 88.2 million cellphone database classified according to different categories including gender, economic group, age group, special interests, geography and a combination of these categories for specific targeting. It is this 88.2 million database of cellphone numbers that Yookoo will give its clients who use Yookoo Rider access to. This is how the system works: The rider must first request Yookoo ride. Once the passenger is inside the car and enroute to their destination, they go to dashboard on their Yookoo app, and select on-ride feature. They then can choose the target group they want to reach. Once that has been done, the rider can send up to 5000 free instant messages about their business to the target group they have chosen. This facility strictly works during a trip on Yookoo Ride. In essence, business people who use Yookoo Rider can save more than R2000, which is the cost of 5000 instant messages on every trip they take. Meanwhile, YooKoo is increasing its operations in more South African cities. After 12 weeks of operations, mainly in Gauteng, Yookoo Ride is now operational in Cape Town, where more than 1000 drivers have been registered.  Registration for drivers and vehicles is still open in both Gauteng and Cape Town. Those wishing to register in Gauteng can visit Yookoo’s offices at 151 5th Street Sandton while those in Cape Town can visit Yookoo’s offices at office number 17, 23 Milner Road, Paarden Eiland. Riders can download the Yookoo Rider app from Playstore or App store. Drivers can also join by downloading the Yookoo Driver app.  The good news for drivers is that Yookoo has signed an agreement with a Cape Town-Based financial services company that will see Yookoo drivers and owners paying cheapest insurance rates for their vehicles. The insurance package is offered by 4Union Financial Services, a company that specialises in providing insurance solutions in the commercial sector. The company has tailor-made a competitive insurance package for Yookoo, its vehicle owners and drivers and will also provide a national, efficient cost-effective repair for Yookoo vehicle owners. The insurance package includes various premium and excess options. “We are proud to be associated with Yookoo a true South African brand. As a partnership, we will build a sustainable brand, all of us can be proud of,” said Isaac Jacobs, 4Union Financial Services managing director. Yookoo Rider app boasts unique features, culture and technical excellence that are on par and in some cases exceed current market players.  With most South Africans battling to cope with the high cost of living, and with many spending a huge chunk of their income on transport, Yookoo is up to 40% cheaper than any app-based ride service in South Africa. Safety of riders in South Africa is a big concern considering a high number of horrible crimes being committed against riders in the past.
For more information contact Yookoo offices at 010 226 9168 or info@yookoo.org