Staff Reporter JOHANNESBURG- The African National Congress (ANC) has on Wednesday, rejected the content of the Daily Maverick article with the contempt it deserves. This comes after the Daily Maverick ran an article under the headline: “Ace Magashule: Let justice be done, though the heavens may fall”. “The African National Congress has noted the ongoing media-orchestrated vilification campaign against its Secretary-General, Comrade Ace Magashule. We reject the content of the Daily Maverick article with the contempt it deserves. Daily Maverick runs the risk of degenerating into gutter journalism”, the ANC said. “By peddling lies and elevating gossip to a status of news is sad and shocking. Accusing Comrade Ace Magashule of criminality without providing any shred of evidence is pathetic at best, and malicious at worst. We urge the Secretary-General not to dignify these insults with a response”. According to the ANC, its commitment to media freedom is well-documented. “We will continue to defend the media’s right to report without fear or favour. However, we take issue with some sections of the media who have decided to adopt factionalism and oppositionist posture in relation to ANC matters. They abuse media freedom and their powerful platforms to pursue narrow political agendas by tarnishing the image of some leaders and opportunistically promoting others.” The ANC, furthermore, said that it believes these allegations and similar ones are concocted by forces that are hostile to the national democratic revolution and are hell-bent on sowing divisions within the ranks of the movement. “They have invested heavily in a divided ANC. These counter-revolutionary agenda will not succeed. “The ANC stands solidly behind its Secretary-General and the entire leadership collective that was elected at the 54th National Conference. We call on all leaders and members of the ANC to unite and expose these divisive tendencies from whatever quarter they may be coming from. Our unity and renewal project demands that we all stay vigilant against wedge-drivers,” the ANC said. 